[Music]
this year on April 10th scientists were
finally able to do the unthinkable
they allowed humanity to look straight
into the abyss of a supermassive black
hole and take a photo like a tourist
attraction but even after these
accomplishments we still don't know much
about black holes at all since one of
them has challenged the whole scientific
community with new impossible feats in
the middle of july 2019 black holes
puzzled astronomers once again
new observations were made possible
thanks to the famed Hubble telescope by
a team of European scientists their
studies showed that a relatively small
black hole situated at the core of NGC
3147 contradicts all our expectations by
almost completely mimicking it's much
bigger siblings to show you how
exceptional this discovery is I'll have
to start with the most basic question
what is a black hole it's the tiniest
and heaviest object possible in the
universe it can swallow entire stars
with ease and is absolutely invisible to
the human eye but wait a minute what was
that giant visible orange thing in the
pictures then did scientists deceive us
with another computer simulation no not
at all the photos are as real as it gets
except the image in the photos is not of
a black hole itself I shall explain
every black hole was once a shining star
just like the others you see in the
night sky at the end of its life a star
can collapse onto itself and condense
all of its enormous mass into a tiny dot
of space such an incredibly dense object
will produce a gravitational force that
will practically tear a hole in
space-time itself and then the whole
matter of reality around it from the
moment of collapse this monstrous
gravity will attract and eagerly consume
every piece of matter around it even the
lightest and fastest particles in the
universe like photons of which light
consists wouldn't be able to escape this
force the core and center of mass of
this black hole is called a singularity
this is the single cause of all the
madness that's going on around it the
mass of this thing can be from hundreds
of millions of the sun's mass to
hundreds of billions and it takes so
little space and volume that its density
is almost infinite no wonder this thing
seemingly breaks all the laws of physics
in fact the density is the most exciting
thing about black holes you see it turns
out that any object can become a tiny
black hole if compressed enough for
example our planet would have to shrink
to 1/3 of an inch to become a tiny
singularity of its own kind and start to
bend reality around itself of course
this can't happen
but it happens to exhausted stars the
surrounding space near the singularity
is the notorious event horizon this is
exactly why black holes are called black
though it's not entirely true normally
you can tell that something is black
because this color doesn't reflect light
at any of its wavelengths the event
horizon of black holes is black because
none of the light that gets into them
can escape so black holes aren't really
black they're just invisible they're
more than a tangible manifestation of
nothingness for any light-sensitive
device the only one of its kind in the
whole universe the thing that makes the
black hole visible and is depicted in
the recently released photos lies beyond
the event horizon it's called the
accretion disk
it's a brightly illuminated disk of
matter swirling towards the center of a
black hole like when a giant drain forms
a quasar quasars have their place among
the oldest celestial bodies known to
humanity because their immense
brightness can outshine even a whole
bunch of stars put together this
brightness is achievable because all the
mass that surrounds a black hole is
rotating around it at a tenth of the
speed of light a movement this fast
leads to constant outbursts of radiation
and some of it shows itself in the
visible spectrum as
light and heat accretion disks consists
mostly of superheated gas and space dust
and the speed of their movement
increases the closer they get to the
event horizon the biggest and shiniest
accretion discs are considered to have
supermassive black holes situated in the
cores of the biggest and brightest
galaxies and it's easy to see why the
more matter a black hole must feast upon
the bigger its mass its event horizon
also gets bigger and an accretion disk
forms around it this is exactly the
reason why NGC 3147 s black hole is so
unique it isn't supposed to have one but
it does let's compare some galaxies and
black holes in their centers to further
elaborate on this glaring difference the
brightest example would be the black
hole in the middle of the largest galaxy
known to us in existence and the
brightest galaxies of its cluster this
galaxy is so large that it would be hard
to imagine it using just numbers if this
Colossus were to replace our own galaxy
it would not only take the place of the
Milky Way but also of several
neighboring galaxies altogether this
giant is the IC 1101 galaxy when it was
first discovered it was taken for a huge
Orange nebula an aftermath of the
supernova explosion it took several
years to get to the shocking truth the
orange color we see is the light of
about 100 trillion stars collected in
one elliptical galaxy most of them look
like ancient red dwarf stars giving away
their tired yellow and orange light but
the biggest surprise was hiding in the
middle of it the supermassive black hole
at the core of IC 1101 suits it's huge
galaxy well this terrifying monster is
heavier than about 40 billion masses of
the Sun the accretion disk is as huge
and luminous as can be expected it's
much like this same black hole from the
photos only black holes this huge are
sometimes called ultra massive giving us
a rare chance to visibly detect them
let's move closer to our home for a
minute our galaxy is much much smaller
than IC 1101 and not as luminous the
Milky Way is just one hundred thousand
light-years across
sounds like nothing when compared with
the supposed six million light years of
IC 1101 s diameter but our galaxy is
still rich enough to feed its black
holes properly
the most notable black hole in the Milky
Way is in the Sagittarius constellation
right in the middle of the spiral of
stars that are galaxies basically made
up
we're 26,000 light-years from it and
it's more than four billion times
heavier than the Sun which makes it a
supermassive black hole
although Sagittarius is black hole is
shrouded by gas clouds blocking our view
scientists were able to get an image
based on the radio spectrum and
radiation coming from its accretion disk
and then we have the spiral galaxy NGC
3147 130 million light-years away from
us this galaxy is small and not dense
enough to constantly feed something as
big and powerful as a supermassive black
hole black holes in these galaxies are
often called starving black holes for a
reason it's expected that black holes in
a position this unfortunate can't have
furious swirling accretion disk around
them it's far more probable that it
would have some concentrated gas around
it in a shape more akin to a doughnut
and nowhere near as luminous still
against all odds NGC 3147 has the same
kind of accretion disk as it's bigger
siblings according to our knowledge this
is almost impossible and this galaxy was
selected precisely to find a black hole
with no accretion disk but as they say
there's no negative result in scientific
research sometimes unexpected findings
can teach us a lot more than pure
success for now no one knows how this
starving black hole can support this
disk to uncover the secret Hubble stays
busy searching for other galaxies with a
lesser luminosity to find new black
holes and see if they show similar Abreu
qualities it'll not only allow
astronomers to study the accretion disks
of starving black holes but will also
present a unique opportunity to test
Albert Einstein's theories of relativity
the disk of NGC 3147 s black hole is
placed so close to the event horizon
that the light it's emitting is twisting
like nowhere else this is exactly what
scientists had been looking for there's
no better place to delve into the fabric
of laws ruling the relations between
time and space than a reality bending
black hole with such rare properties how
about you what secrets do you think
black holes can show us in the future
wormholes another reality let me know
down in the comments if you learned
something new today then give this video
a like and share it with a friend but
hey don't go getting sucked into a black
hole just yet
we have we have over 2000 cool videos
for you to check out right here all you
have to do is pick the left or right
video click on it and enjoy stay on the
bright side of life
[Music]